GraalWasm embed Rust code guide (#47)
graalvm/graal-languages-demos: graalwasm/graalwasm-embed-rust-code-guide/README.md

# Embed Rust in Java Using GraalWasm

The example below demonstrates how to compile a Rust library to WebAssembly and embed it in a Java application using [GraalWasm](https://graalvm.org/webassembly).

> For interoperability, generate JavaScript bindings for the Rust library and run them on [GraalJS](https://graalvm.org/javascript).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable interoperability, generate JavaScript bindings for the Rust library and run them on [GraalJS](https://graalvm.org/javascript).
```

### Prerequisites

To complete this guide, you need the following:
- [Maven](https://maven.apache.org/)
- [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install)

> - A bit of time to explore and experiment 

Reviewer: Feel these could be last. 
So:
- Maven
- Rust
- JDK 21 or later
- Your favorite IDE or text editor for coding comfortably
- A bit of time to explore and experiment

- Your favorite IDE or text editor for coding comfortably 
- JDK 21 or later

> ## 1. Setting up the Maven Project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 1. Setting Up the Maven Project
```

To follow this guide, generate the application from the [Maven Quickstart Archetype](https://maven.apache.org/archetypes/maven-archetype-quickstart/) and go into the directory:

```shell
mvn archetype:generate -DarchetypeGroupId=org.apache.maven.archetypes -DarchetypeArtifactId=maven-archetype-quickstart -DarchetypeVersion=1.5 -DgroupId=com.example -DartifactId=demo -DinteractiveMode=false
cd demo
```

### 1.1. Adding the Polyglot API and GraalWasm Dependencies

> Add the following set of dependencies to the `<dependencies>` section of your project's _pom.xml_:

Reviewer: Is it worth saying why we add these?

```xml
<!-- <dependencies> -->
  <dependency>
      <groupId>org.graalvm.polyglot</groupId>
      <artifactId>polyglot</artifactId>
      <version>${graal.languages.version}</version>
  </dependency>
  <dependency>
      <groupId>org.graalvm.polyglot</groupId>
      <artifactId>wasm</artifactId>
      <version>${graal.languages.version}</version>
      <type>pom</type>
  </dependency>
  <dependency>
      <groupId>org.graalvm.polyglot</groupId>
      <artifactId>js</artifactId>
      <version>${graal.languages.version}</version>
      <type>pom</type>
  </dependency>
<!-- </dependencies> -->
```

## 2. Setting Up Rust Code

Next, create a Rust project, write Rust code, and compile it into a WebAssembly module.

> ### 2.1  Creating Rust project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 2.1  Creating the Rust project
```

```bash
cargo new --lib src/main/rust/mywasmlib 

```

### 2.2. Writing Rust Code

> Put the following  program in _mywasmlib/src/lib.rs_:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the following program to _mywasmlib/src/lib.rs_:
```

```rust
use wasm_bindgen::prelude::*;

#[wasm_bindgen]
pub fn add(left: i32, right: i32) -> i32 {
    left + right
}

#[wasm_bindgen]
pub struct Person {
    name: String,
}

#[wasm_bindgen]
impl Person {
    pub fn say_hello(&self) -> String {
        format!("Hello, {}!", self.name)
    }
}

#[wasm_bindgen]
pub fn new_person(name: String) -> Person {
    Person { name }
}

#[wasm_bindgen]
pub fn reverse_string(input: String) -> String {
    input.chars().rev().collect()
}
```

Make sure your _Cargo.toml_ looks like this :

```toml
[package]
name = "mywasmlib"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2024"

[dependencies]
wasm-bindgen = "0.2"

[lib]
crate-type = ["cdylib", "rlib"]
```

### 2.3. Compiling Rust to WebAssembly

> To compile the Rust library to WebAssembly, use the `exec-maven-plugin` to invoke [`wasm-pack`](https://github.com/drager/wasm-pack) as part of the `generate-resources` Maven phase:

Reviewer: I got mixed up here.

Are there extra steps? Doe the reader need to:
1. `cargo install wasm-pack` ?
2. `mvn generate-resources` ?

Add the following xml somewhere? 

Also would they know all this - I am just quite new 👶

Author: Normally, you would compile your Rust code to WebAssembly manually using wasm-pack. However, to automate the process, we’ve added the exec-maven-plugin configuration to the pom.xml. 
1-Yes actually we should've added the `cargo install wasm-pack` but we missed it . Thank you!
2- No need. when you run `mvn clean package`  it will execute all build phases up to and including package (which also includes generate-resources as one of the earlier phases).

            <goals>
                <goal>exec</goal>
            </goals>
            <configuration>
                <executable>wasm-pack</executable>
                <workingDirectory>${project.basedir}/src/main/rust/mywasmlib</workingDirectory>
                <arguments combine.self="override">
                    <argument>build</argument>
                    <argument>--no-typescript</argument>
                    <argument>--target</argument>
                    <argument>bundler</argument>
                    <argument>--out-dir</argument>
                    <argument>${project.build.outputDirectory}/mywasmlib</argument>
                </arguments>
            </configuration>
        </execution>
    </executions>
</plugin>
```

As a result, the Wasm module becomes available as a Java resource on the class path.
Note that `wasm-pack` also creates a _target/_ directory in _src/main/rust/mywasmlib_, which you want to add to your `.gitignore`.

## 3. Using the WebAssembly Module from Java using the JavaScript Binding

### 3.1 Creating Java main class.

Now you can embed the Rust library in a Java application using the GraalVM Polyglot API.

> For this, you:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do this:
```

> 1. load the JavaScript binding as a Java resource

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Load the JavaScript binding as a Java resource
```

> 2. evaluate the binding as a JavaScript module in a `Context` with access to `js` and `wasm`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Evaluate the binding as a JavaScript module in a `Context` with access to `js` and `wasm`
```

> 3. create a Java interface for the Rust library

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Create a Java interface for the Rust library
```

> 3. use [`Value.as(Class)`](https://www.graalvm.org/sdk/javadoc/org/graalvm/polyglot/Value.html#as(java.lang.Class)) to expose the module under the Java interface

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Use [`Value.as(Class)`](https://www.graalvm.org/sdk/javadoc/org/graalvm/polyglot/Value.html#as(java.lang.Class)) to expose the module under the Java interface
```

> 4. program against the Java interface as usual 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Program against the Java interface as usual 
```

                .allowAllAccess(true)
                .option("js.esm-eval-returns-exports", "true")
                .option("js.text-encoding", "true")
                .option("js.webassembly", "true").build()) {
            Source jsSource = Source.newBuilder("js", myWasmLibURL).mimeType("application/javascript+module").build();
            MyWasmLib myWasmLibModule = context.eval(jsSource).as(MyWasmLib.class);

            System.out.println(myWasmLibModule.add(2, 3));
            System.out.println(myWasmLibModule.new_person("Jane").say_hello());
            System.out.println(myWasmLibModule.reverse_string("Hello There!"));
        }
    }

    interface MyWasmLib {
        int add(int left, int right);

        interface Person {
            String say_hello();
        }

        Person new_person(String name);

        String reverse_string(String word);
    }
}
```

## 4. Building and Testing the Application

Compile and run the Java application with Maven:

```shell
./mvnw package
./mvnw exec:exec
```

The expected output should look like this:
```
5
Hello, Jane!
!erehT olleH
```

## Compiling the Application to Native

> To compile the Java application with GraalVM Native Image, additional [reachability metadata](https://www.graalvm.org/latest/reference-manual/native-image/metadata/) is required to register reflection, proxies, and resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To compile the Java application with GraalVM Native Image, you need additional [reachability metadata](https://www.graalvm.org/latest/reference-manual/native-image/metadata/) to register reflection, proxies, and resources.
```

```xml
    <profiles>
        <profile>
            <id>native</id>
            <build>
                <plugins>
                    <plugin>
                        <groupId>org.graalvm.buildtools</groupId>
                        <artifactId>native-maven-plugin</artifactId>
                        <extensions>true</extensions>
                        <executions>
                            <execution>
                                <id>build-native</id>
                                <goals>
                                    <goal>compile-no-fork</goal>
                                </goals>
                                <phase>package</phase>
                            </execution>
                        </executions>
                        <configuration>
                            <mainClass>com.example.App</mainClass>
                        </configuration>
                    </plugin>
                </plugins>
            </build>
        </profile>
    </profiles>
```

To build the native application, run:

```bash
./mvnw -Pnative package
```

Finally, you can run the native application:

```bash
./target/demo

> ```

Reviewer: What do they get from this?

Reviewer 2: I am adding some notes on this.
